Practical Bash Usage – Example 3
As penetration testers, we’re always
trying to find efficiencies to
minimize the amount of time we spend
analyzing data,
especially the volumes of data we
recover during various scans.
Let’s assume we’re tasked with scanning
a class C subnet to identify web servers
and determine whether or not they present
an interesting attack surface.
Port scanning is the process of
inspecting TCP or UDP ports on a remote
machine with the intention of detecting
what services are running on the target
and potentially what attack vectors exist.
We discuss port scanning in much more
detail in another module, but for now,
let’s keep it general as this is a great
example that shows how Bash scripting
can automate a rather tedious task.
In order to accomplish our goal, we would
first port scan the entire subnet to
pinpoint potential open web services,
then we could manually
browse their web pages.
To begin, let’s create a temporary folder
to be used for this exercise
and cd into it.
Now let’s move on to the interesting part,
a scan of the class C subnet.
We will only focus on port 80 to keep the
scope somewhat manageable and we will use
nmap as our port scanning tool.
This is a pretty straight-forward scan,
with -A for aggressive scanning
-p to specify the port or port range, and
–open to only return machines with
open ports.
We also include -oG to save the scan
results in greppable format.
Again, don’t fret if nmap is new to you
as we’ll go into further detail later.
Nmap certainly provided a decent amount
of output to work with.
Let’s inspect the output file to
familiarize ourselves with its format.
Interestingly, it looks like each IP
address is repeated twice,
the first line displaying the machine
status,
and the second displaying the port number
being scanned.
Since we are only interested in unique IP
addresses, some clean up is necessary.
Let’s grep for lines containing port 80.
This is a great start but notice that
the first line is irrelevant.
To exclude it, we will grep again with -v,
which is a “reverse-grep",
showing only lines that do not match the
search string.
In this case, we don’t want any lines
that contain
the case-sensitive keyword “Nmap”.
Our output is looking much better.
Let’s try to extract just the IP
addresses,
as this is all we are really interested
in.
To do this, we’ll use awk to print the
second field, using Tab as a delimiter.
Good. This looks like a clean IP address
list.
For the next step, we’ll use a Bash
one-liner to loop through the list of IPs
above and run cutycapt, which is a web
page rendering capture utility.
We will use –url to specify the target
web site
and –out to specify the name of the
output file.
Once our loop is finished and our prompt
is returned,
we should have a number of screenshot
files.
Outstanding. We are getting closer to our
goal.
We could examine these files individually
but the more attractive option is to once
again put our scripting knowledge to work
and see if there is anything else
we can automate.
This will require not only Bash scripting
skills but also a bit of basic
HTML knowledge.
This script builds an HTML file called
web.html,
starting with the most basic tags.
Then, the ls and awk statements insert
each PNG file name into an HTML IMG tag.
Finally, we append HTML and end tags
into the file.
Now let’s run our script and check out
the resultant page in our browser.
The result is simple, but effective,
giving us a view of each
web server’s main page.
Hopefully, these brief practical examples
have given you an idea about some of the
possibilities that Bash scripting has to
offer.
Learning to use Bash effectively will be
essential when trying
to quickly automate a large number of
tasks during assessments.